Title: Getting to RC
Date: 2017-02-26
Category: misc, programming

You wouldn't know it from looking at my blog, but I attended a batch at the
Recurse Center from August to early November last year, and it was the best
experience of my life. Many Recursers write a return statement afterwards
reflecting on their time there, and in the process of writing mine I realised
I have a lot to say about my journey getting there in the first place.

At the end of 2013, the CSIRO in Australia generously bent the rules for me by
allowing me to do a student internship despite having just completed an
undergraduate degree. I was repaying this generosity by slacking off on work
time and reading blog posts on Reddit (as you do) when I encountered a blog
post about Hacker School. The details are in a server log somewhere, but I'm
reasonably certain it was a Julia Evans post, and they're tonally consistent on
this subject so we'll pretend it was [this particular
one](https://jvns.ca/blog/2014/02/15/how-was-hacker-school/). I had [an
immediate and visceral reaction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2p1dS9hoptU)
to learning about this magical place, but because of my financial and visa
situation at the time I put it in the back of my mind and mostly forgot about
it.

Less than two years later, I became an Australian citizen. The citizenship
process limits how much time you can spend overseas, but as far as I'm aware
it's open season after you get your passport sorted. I was discussing this with
my mum when she asked me what I would do next with my life. Things were going
pretty well for me at work and the Canberra spring was springing, so I was
pretty content as I was, but she pushed for a better answer until I recalled
RC. She encouraged me to apply, which for her meant nagging me every week until
I submitted my application. Thanks Ma <3.

I wasn't accepted the first time. I was incredibly nervous and flustered during
my interview, and I didn't have a good idea of what I wanted to accomplish
during my batch beyond vague ideas of learning all the Haskell. At one point my
interviewer asked me how I would measure my progress, and I had no idea. I even
thought I did okay and the rejection email stung when it arrived a few days
later. However, I still believed that I was a good fit for RC. It helped that
the [FAQ](https://www.recurse.com/faq) states "It's not uncommon [...] to admit
people who we had previously rejected". I decided to reapply in a few months.

In the meantime, I realised I didn't have to wait until RC to begin learning
Haskell. I was a regular attendee of [CanFP](https://www.meetup.com/CanFPG/)
but still unsure of how to bridge the gap between learning about lenses and
monads and writing real code that does things. I considered myself a pretty
decent user of Git and people talk about how Git is functional, so I
offered to give [a presentation I had prepared
before](http://vaibhavsagar.com/git-it-going/) a second time. The co-founder I
spoke to didn't like that idea, but he had been looking into how Git is
implemented, and he said he'd love to hear a talk on Git internals in Haskell.
I had my project.

A few months later, things had gone pear-shaped for me on the work front. I
left my job and reapplied to RC. In my mind the worst that could have happened
had already happened, so I was much more relaxed. My interviewer this time had
attended RC when they were like me at the end of 2013, and I think we were able
to relate to each other better. I'd learned some Haskell by working on my Git
thing, which I called
[duffer](https://github.com/vaibhavsagar/duffer/tree/4e4beb35f39d957ff1ccaf187dee3272deb58870)
and I progressed to the pairing interview. The pairing interview was my first
experience pair programming, and I think it went well, because I got an
acceptance email this time.

Although I was applying in April, I applied to the batch starting in August
because my mum's 50th birthday was in July and attending that was
non-negotiable. I was skeptical of my ability to line up a job starting in
November and it didn't make sense to hang out in Canberra with nothing to do,
so I packed up my life and moved (and myself) back to Jakarta.

I'd given the [presentation on duffer](https://github.com/vaibhavsagar/duffer/blob/7a312355ebeacc38f553c71afcd90b3941c0069c/presentation/presentation.md)
but it turned out that Haskell and Git were both more interesting than I
realised, and so I continued working on it.

Both my parents [work in IT](http://infotech.co.id/) so their hope was that I
would be able to help them with some projects they were working on until I left
for my batch. Instead, what I ended up doing was showing up at work and
ignoring them for the rest of the day in favour of Haskell. This was not the
best idea, but I definitely got a lot better at Haskell.

My mum celebrated her birthday in Bali, and I insisted on bringing my laptop so
I could keep my Github commit streak going. This turned out to a good decision
because that day the RC mailing list thread welcoming new batchlings
was started. I ducked out of celebrations and spent a while agonising over the
perfect introduction.

Two weeks later I was in New York.
